PEP 697 (new): C-API for Extending Opaque Types (#2772)
python/peps: pep-0697.rst

PEP: 697
Title: C API for Extending Opaque Types
Author: Petr Viktorin <encukou@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 23-Aug-2022

> Python-Version: 3.12
> 
> 
> Abstract

Reviewer: If you prefer, instead of manually specifying the highlighting language of each of your code blocks, since this PEP is exclusively C-related, you could just do this:

```suggestion
Python-Version: 3.12

.. highlight:: c

Abstract
```

Reviewer: I do as well, FWIW—just wanted to offer that as an option.

========

Add limited C API for extending types whose ``struct`` is opaque,
by allowing code to only deal with data specific to a particular (sub)class.

Make the mechanism usable with ``PyHeapType``.

Motivation
==========

Extending opaque types
----------------------

In order to allow changing/optimizing CPython, and allow freedom for alternate
implementations of the C API, best practice is to not expose memory layout
(C structs) in public API, and instead rely on accessor functions.
(When this hurts performance, direct struct access can be allowed in a
less stable API tier, at the expense of compatibility with diferent
versions/implementations of the interpreter.)

However, when a particular type's instance struct is hidden, it becomes
difficult to subclass it.

> The usual subclassing pattern, explained `in the tutorial <https://docs.python.org/3/extending/newtypes_tutorial.html#subclassing-other-types>`_,

Reviewer: Minor sidenote: You could consider using an intersphinx reference for these cases rather than a hardcoded URL—though you'll need to add proper ref target labels to the source tutorial headings.

You can also use it to easily and reliably link existing functions, structs, etc., if you think it prudent, instead of hardcoding links or making the reader search for them themselves if they want more details.

Reviewer: BTW, see https://github.com/python/peps/pull/2773#issuecomment-1229104900

Author: So, I'm trying to link to [Python 3.11's `PyListObject`](https://docs.python.org/3.11/c-api/list.html?highlight=pylistobject#c.PyListObject). I added a `python3.11` mapping and tried:
```
:c:type:`python3.11:PyListObject`
```
but I'm getting:
```
WARNING: Unparseable C cross-reference: 'python3.11:PyListObject'
Invalid C declaration: Expected identifier in nested name. [error at 8]
  python3.11:PyListObject
  --------^
```
So I read Intersphinx docs, and got this to work:
```
:external+python3.11:c:type:`PyListObject`
```
Is that the way? If so, it doesn't sound like something to burden PEP authors with, tbh

a heap type (``PyType_Spec``) the example reads:

.. code-block:: c

    typedef struct {
        PyListObject list;
        int state;
    } SubListObject;

    static PyType_Spec Sublist_spec = {
        .name = "sublist.SubList",
        .basicsize = sizeof(SubListObject),
        .itemsize = 0,
        .flags = Py_TPFLAGS_DEFAULT | Py_TPFLAGS_BASETYPE,
        .slots = SubList_slots
    };

Since the superclass struct (``PyListObject``) is part of the subclass struct
(``SubListObject``):

- ``PyListObject`` size must be known at compile time, and
- the size must be the same across all interpreters/versions the compiled
  extension is ABI-compatible with.

But in limited API/stable ABI, we do not expose the size of ``PyListObject``,
so that it can vary between CPython versions (and even between possible
alternate ABI-compatible C API implementations).

With the size not available, limited API users must resort to workarounds such
as querying ``__basicsize__`` and plugging it into ``PyType_Spec`` at runtime,
and divining the correct offset for their extra data.
This requires making assumptions about memory layout, which the limited API

> is supposed to hide.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I realize you buried the lede here. The key motivation is "to attach C-level state to custom types". You might explain this use case more clearly up front.

Extending variable-size objects
-------------------------------

Another scenario where the traditional way to extend an object does not work
is variable-sized objects, i.e. ones with non-zero ``tp_itemsize``.
If the instance struct ends with a variable-length array (such as
in ``tuple`` or ``int``), subclasses cannot add their own extra data without
detailed knowledge about how the superclass allocates and uses its memory.

Some types, such as CPython's ``PyHeapType``, handle this by storing
variable-sized data after the fixed-size struct.

> This means that any subclass can add its own fixed-size data.

Reviewer 2: Okay, more detail would be helpful.

> This means that any subclass can add its own fixed-size data.

Reviewer 3: Please use the correct name `PyHeapTypeObject` here to avoid confusion.

(Only one class in the inheritance hierarchy can use variable-sized data, though.)
This PEP proposes API that makes this practice easier, and ensures the
variable-sized data is properly aligned.

Note that many variable-size types, like ``int`` or ``tuple``, do not use
this mechanism. 
This PEP does not propose any changes to existing variable-size types (like
``int`` or ``tuple``) except ``PyHeapType``.

Extending ``PyHeapType`` specifically
-------------------------------------

The motivating problem this PEP solves is creating metaclasses, that is,
subclasses of ``type``.

> The underlying ``PyHeapTypeObject`` struct is both and variable-sized, and

Reviewer 2: both _what_ and variable-sized? Missing word?

Author: ```suggestion
The underlying ``PyHeapTypeObject`` struct is both variable-sized and
```
Word *should* be missing. Thanks for the catch!

opaque in the limited API.

Projects such as language bindings and frameworks that need to attach custom
data to metaclasses currently resort to questionable workarounds.
The situation is worse in projects that target the Limited API.

For an example of the currently necessary workarounds, see:

> `nb_type_data_static <https://github.com/wjakob/nanobind/blob/f3044cf44763e105428e4e0cf8f42d951b9cc997/src/nb_type.cpp#L1085>`_

Reviewer 2: Can't say I understand what's going on there, since it's modern C++ and I don't read that.

Could you perhaps explain what it is doing?

Are you aware of pure-C examples of similar workarounds? Or is C++ the main target here?

Author: It's querying the Python attribute ``__basicsize__`` and plugging it into ``PyType_Spec`` used to create a subclass. I'll move the English description here.

I'm using nanobind (C++) for examples & initial design discussions, because it's small and free of historical baggage. But Java or Rust bindings have similar use cases, and I'll consider the PEP a failure if JPype & Pyo3 don't find it useful.

(My own motivation is improving subclassing API in general, but that's not what people behind binding generators are asking for...)

Reviewer 2: Just don't expect your readers to be familiar with nanobind. It's fine to explain that nanobind provides a use case, but you still need to explain what problem it is solving and how, and how its solution is sub-optimial and how your PEP provides a better solution. I'm guessing from what you explained in comments above that when a subclass of a variable-sized type (like tuple) needs to add extra state it must define a struct to hold the extra state and write a custom function that calculates the offset of that extra state relative to the nominal (`PyObject *`) start of the object, and it also needs to override the new-instance allocation (`tp_new`? `tp_alloc`?) to allocate space for the extra state.

Reviewer 3: The C equivalent snippet of the code would be helpful. The code is small and easy is to write in C.

in the not-yet-released limited-API branch of ``nanobind``
(a spiritual successor of the popular C++ binding generator ``pybind11``).

> Rationale

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is the right section heading here. Maybe "proposal"?

Author: I'll rearrange this to make it clearer.

=========

This PEP proposes a different model: instead of the superclass data being
part of the subclass data, the extra space a subclass needs is specified

> and accessed separately.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what this is describing. Are you proposing to use a pointer?

Author: A high-level overview. Pointer-level details are in Specification.
(I'll clarify this.)

Reviewer 2: OK, it looks like maybe it's so high level as to be meaningless (at least to someone who basically only learns from examples like myself).

> (How base class data is accessed is left to whomever implements the base class:

Reviewer 2: whoever

Author: Really? It would be “left to her”, not “left to she”.

Reviewer 2: But it's "left to (_she_ who implements the base class)". See https://www.thoughtco.com/whoever-and-whomever-1689622#toc-how-to-use-whomever, the example "The prize should be given to **whoever** wins the race".

they can for example  provide accessor functions, expose a part of its
``struct`` for better performance, or do both.)

> The proposed mechanism allows using static, read-only ``PyType_Spec``

Reviewer 2: IIUC `PyType_Spec` is specific to `PyHeapType`. So this makes me wonder -- perhaps the PEP is just about making `PyHeapType` more usable? Especially from C++? And you should just say so in the PEP title, rather than claiming more generality?

Author: It's about defining types. There are two ways to do that, ``PyType_Spec`` and static types. 
Maybe I should be clearer that it doesn't apply to static types?

It's not specific to C++.

Reviewer 2: I figured it doesn't apply to static types (3rd party static types are outmoded anyway :-). I understand it's not unique to C++ but your only example uses C++ and for a non-C++-user that example was more baffling than helpful. The excess generality that I'm objecting most to is mentioned below, "The approach generalizes to non-metaclass types as well."

even if the superclass struct is opaque, like ``PyTypeObject`` in
the Limited API.

Combined with a way to create class from ``PyType_Spec`` and a custom metaclass,
this will allow libraries like nanobind or JPype to create metaclasses
without making assumptions about ``PyTypeObject``'s memory layout.

> The approach generalizes to non-metaclass types as well.

Reviewer 2: But do we care?

Author: Yes. It enables the [example in the tutorial](https://docs.python.org/3.10/extending/newtypes_tutorial.html#subclassing-other-types) to work with stable ABI. (And in case you're following Mark Shannon, I should add that *any* stable ABI will need to solve the issue somehow.)

The tutorial's example – extending `list` with an extra C variable – is particularly impractical/simplified, sure, but it shows that currently, subclassing ties you to the ABI of the superclass.

Reviewer 2: Hm. I see no particular problem to extending list, since the list instance itself is not variable-size -- it is a plain struct whose `sizeof` doesn't lie, and the example even works with a static type. (Perhaps that's why list was chosen in the tutorial? :-) Admittedly it doesn't work with the stable ABI (because the typedef `PyListObject` isn't in the ABI) but that's not the same problem you explained to me in the comments above (or I still misunderstood your explanation). The problem with defining types with extra state seems to be caused by the basic type object being variable-sized, not because it's not in the ABI. Or have I got that wrong? The equivalent at the non-metaclass level would seem to me to define a subclass of `tuple` that adds extra state to each tuple instance.

Although now that I read this back I'm not sure whether I've fully understood the problem that you are solving.

Specification
=============

In the code blocks below, only function headers are part of the specification.
Other code (the size/offset calculations) are details of the initial CPython
implementation, and subject to change.

Relative ``basicsize``
----------------------

The ``basicsize`` member of ``PyType_Spec`` will be allowed to be zero or
negative.

> In that case, it will specify the inverse of *extra* storage space instances of

Reviewer 2: "inverse" makes me think of 1/x, not -x. How about this?
```suggestion
In that case, its absolute value will specify the amount of *extra* storage space instances of
```

Author: Thanks for the clarification!
(English math terminology is confusing. I looked up that [inverse can mean both](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverse), and hoped the meaning's clear when dealing with integers and negatives.)

Reviewer 3: Additive inverse is the correct terminology here but absolute value works too :)
